Spain have sacked head coach Julen Lopetegui after he was named the new Real Madrid boss, two days before their opening World Cup match with Portugal.

Real Madrid announced on Tuesday that Lopetegui would succeed Zinedine Zidane at the Bernabeu on a three-year deal.

The Spanish football federation (RFEF) said it had dismissed the 51-year-old because the negotiation occurred "without any information to the RFEF".

Spain sporting director Fernando Hierro will take charge for the World Cup.

The former Real Madrid and Bolton Wanderers defender is in his second spell as sporting director, having returned to the role in November 2017, six years after leaving the position.

The tournament starts on Thursday in Russia.

Follow live reaction to Lopetegui's sacking
RFEF president Luis Rubiales, who was told of Lopetegui's new role five minutes before it was announced, said he had found himself in "a very difficult situation".

"I know there's going to be criticism whatever I do," he added.

"I'm sure this will, in time, make us stronger. I admire Julen very much, I respect him very much. He seems a top trainer and that makes it harder to make the decision.

"You can't do things this way, two or three days before the World Cup. We have been compelled to make this decision."

Lopetegui became Spain manager in 2016 following Vicente del Bosque's retirement, and remained unbeaten through his reign.

Spain won 14 of 20 games with Lopetegui in charge, drawing the remaining six.

According to reports in Spain, Rubiales was incensed when he discovered Lopetegui had agreed a deal with Madrid.

He left a Fifa Congress meeting in Moscow early in order to return to Spain's base in Krasnodar.

It has been claimed senior players - including captain Sergio Ramos - fought for Lopetegui to remain in charge for the duration of the World Cup.

Spain begin their World Cup campaign against Portugal on Friday in a match live on BBC One (19:00 BST kick-off).

Analysis
Spanish football expert Guillem Balague

Maybe the Spanish FA should have just smacked Lopetegui's hand, and said "naughty boy," but let's continue because two days later we have to face Portugal.

But it's true that within the squad players were divided as well. Now, by getting rid of Lopetegui, everybody can focus on one thing. You've seen it in history that when big obstacles get overcome and everybody gets joined together, it can actually benefit the national side, even though right now it's a big drama.

Fernando Hierro knows the federation, knows the players. He was really crucial in 2010 after Spain lost their opening game against Switzerland. He got everyone together. He's got the talent to do that again.

Do I think Spain can still go far in the World Cup? Put it this way, is Isco still playing? Is Aspas still on the bench but scoring goals? Diego Costa? Sergio Ramos? Gerard Pique? Jordi Alba? The team is still strong.

In terms of them taking their minds off a game it's not possible. Players just focus, they get into the action and nothing else matters.

But of course they love the easy life that they're not going to get outside of when they are actually playing. For them, the matches will be a chance to escape the noise that has already been produced and will continue to be produced over the next few weeks.

Listen to more from Guillem Balague discussing the situation on Radio 5 live from 19:00 BST.