Spain have sacked head coach Julen Lopetegui after he was named the new Real Madrid boss, two days before their opening World Cup match with Portugal.

Real Madrid announced on Tuesday that Lopetegui would succeed Zinedine Zidane at the Bernabeu on a three-year deal.

The Spanish football federation (RFEF) said it had dismissed the 51-year-old because the negotiation occurred "without any information to the RFEF".

Spain sporting director Fernando Hierro will take charge for the World Cup.

The former Real Madrid and Bolton Wanderers defender is in his second spell as sporting director, having returned to the role in November 2017, six years after leaving the position.

The tournament starts on Thursday in Russia.

Follow live reaction to Lopetegui's sacking
RFEF president Luis Rubiales, who was told of Lopetegui's new role five minutes before it was announced, said he had found himself in "a very difficult situation".

"I know there's going to be criticism whatever I do," he added.

The science-fiction series The Expanse is set 200 years in the future: humans have established colonies on the Moon and Mars, and have begun colonising the asteroid belt.

There are compelling reasons why we might wish to colonise the asteroid belt, but the predominant one is mining. Unlike the Earth, where precious metals tend to be buried underground, there is an abundance of metals like gold and palladium on the surface of asteroids. But they could also be used as a scientific research outpost.

The Asteroid Belt orbits the Sun between Mars and Jupiter, and is thought to be the remains of a planet. While the Asteroid Belt is the main source of asteroids, asteroids can be found throughout the Solar System and come in three basic types; stony, carbonaceous and metallic. They range in size from hundreds of metres to the size of a small house.

You might also like:

How can we avoid extinction by asteroid?
The challenge of catching a floating asteroid
How we could stop a doomsday asteroid
Companies like Planetary Resources and Deep Space Industries are already investing in asteroid mining and they could begin extraction by 2025. However, creating a settlement on an asteroid is far more complicated than simply mining one.

ISS over Earth (Credit: Alamy)
The ISS is less than 200 miles from Earth; the asteroid belt is many millions of miles away (Credit: Alamy)
One of the main challenges will be the amount of radiation hitting the colonies. There will be solar radiation, Jupiter¡¯s radiation belt and more from cosmic rays. ¡°Cosmic rays are high energy particles, mostly just protons or high-energy nuclei. They zip straight through you and do bad things to you,¡± explains Martin Elvis of the Harvard-Smithsonian Centre for Astrophysics. On Earth, our atmosphere absorbs the most dangerous rays, and a space colony would need a similar shield. ¡°A thick layer of water or ice could be used [for protection], but it would have to be several thick.¡±

As well as radiation, long-term exposure to zero or micro-gravity is detrimental to the human body. ¡°Astronauts on the ISS have to exercise for two hours every day with resistance machines and still end up with health problems from living in zero gravity for such a long time,¡± says astrophysicist Katie Mack, an assistant professor at North Carolina State University. Any long-term asteroid settlement would need some form of artificial gravity to mitigate this effect ¨C possibly by spinning the entire structure.